Capstone Project: Battle of the Neighbourhoods

Introduction and Business Problem

Business Question: Where to build new apartment complex in the city of Toronto, Canada?

An American property management company (‘City Living Limited’) is looking to build a new 
apartment complex building in one of the neighbourhoods in Toronto, Canada. 
The company has been approached by an investor (and shareholder in the company), who wants 
to invest 40% in a new building project in Toronto. The investor has explained that he wants 
the new apartment complex to be built in a neighbourhood that lies within a Toronto-named Borough 
(in other words, in a borough that includes the name ‘Toronto’ – for example, West Toronto, Downtown Toronto, etc.).  
The company would have to invest the remaining 60% into the new property development.

After meeting with key stakeholders and upper management executives, the main requirements for the 
location of the new building are: it must be near amenities (shops, restaurants, etc.) and be in a 
Toronto-named borough. The accessibility to local trendy venues is extremely important, as the property 
market is highly competitive, especially in a popular city like Toronto. City Living Limited will be spending 
a significant amount on building this new property, and it’s critical that they find the right location with 
the highest profitability. Building in a foreign country (even one just across the border) requires building 
and planning permission, legal fees, and the cost of flights from New York to Toronto for planning meetings and 
overseeing development. This would be a very expensive project.

As a Data Analyst, I have been tasked with assessing whether the neighbourhoods of Toronto-named boroughs would 
be a good investment decision or too risky. The company has informed me that they recently built a property in the 
trendy neighbourhood of Marble Hill, Manhattan (New York). As such, they believe that finding a similar location in Toronto 
would be a good start in locating a new building site.

II & III. Data and Methodology 

Data Requirements: 
Understanding the business problem and knowing what to look for in the datasets (I’ll need post codes, neighbourhood names, 
borough names, using Foursquare API credentials to gather location information). 

Data Collection:
Before exploring the Toronto borough and neighbourhood data, I will first explore the neighbourhood of Marble Hill, Manhattan. 
I will upload and read the Manhattan data (through a json file), build a dataframe using pandas and create map visualisations 
with folium and other necessary libraries (see github notebook for further details).  I will parse and scrape a wikipedia page 
with Toronto postal codes and neighbourhood data, in order to build a dataframe, create map visualisations, and make Foursquare 
API calls. 

Data Understanding:
I will be building dataframes from the data sets, then cleaning the data, should there be any entry errors or null values. 

Data Preparation:
I will use a combination of SQL queries within python to analyse top venues in Marble Hill, in order to better understand 
what to look for in the Toronto data. 

I will use Foursquare API to gather venue information regarding Marble Hill, which will then be used in comparison to the 
Toronto data. This will allow me to see which (if any) neighbourhoods in Toronto-named boroughs are the best fit for the 
company’s new project. 

IV. Results 

A folium map produced with the Toronto-named Boroughs and the top venues showed West Toronto as the closest borough to the 
pocket of venues.  By creating a dataframe of West Toronto neighbourhoods, I was able to do an API call through Foursquare 
that revealed the top venues within that region. This showed Dovercourt Village, Dufferin to have the closest vicinity to the 
top venues, making it a prime neighbourhood location for a potential property development. 

However, after comparing this neighbourhood to the neighbourhod of Marble Hill, I could see that Marble Hill has 18 unique 
categories of venues, whereas Dovercourt has only 11. Furthermore, upon closer inspection of the dataframes showing each 
neighbourhoods’ top venues, the categories were significantly dissimilar in most respects, save for around three or four. 

Dovercourt has five categories of venues that Marble Hill doesn’t have: Supermarket, Bakery, Brewery, Music Venue, and a Park. 
Marble Hill has venues such as Yoga, Supplement Shop, Tennic Stadium, Department Store, Videogame Store, and a wider selection 
of Restaurants than Dovercourt. Both neighbourhoods have a Pharmacy, Bank, Café/Coffee Shop, Gym/Fitness Centre. However, clearly 
the differences in venue type and frequency show Dovercourt to be a risky place to invest in a new property development. 

V. Discussion 

As Marble Hill and Dovercourt Village, Dufferin are in two different cities in two different countries, it is important to 
acknowledge potential cultural differences that could both hinder and help a new apartment complex to be successful. For example, 
Dovercourt Village was near to a trendy park, whereas Marble Hill didn’t have a nearby park. Perhaps Canadian professionals would 
prefer an apartment close to nature, such as a park, while Manhattan professionals might prefer fitness centres and yoga facilities? 
My recommendation to City Living Ltd. would be to conduct market research into cultural and economic differences in the two regions. 
This would reveal whether the company should look for certain amenities in a Canadian neighbourhood that it might not look for in an 
American location. 

Although the company had significant success in Marble Hill with a recent development, Toronto is a different city and may require a 
different perspective on what makes a location desirable. This could certainly imply that building a property in Dovercourt could prove 
highly successful. But the financial risk is still very high, which is why I recommend further research should be done to fully understand 
the market and how it differs between these two vibrant cities. 

VI. Conclusion

In summary, this project has analysed datasets from a csv file and from scraping a Wiki page, in order to determine the suitability 
of a potential location for a new property development. Upon investigation through exploratory analysis with pandas and folium maps, 
it has been determined that the client (City Living Ltd) should not move forward with a new apartment complex in the Toronto 
neighbourhood of Dovercourt Village, Dufferin. The client has been advised to seek further market research in order to better decide 
what action should be taken, if any. 


 
